the city of Toledo's Collins Park water
treatment plant has been in continuous
operation since 1941 as a result of the
9/11 2001 terrorist attacks on the US
security measures at the water treatment
plant have been heightened a double row
fence with barbed wire and razor wire
now surrounds the entire facility the
plant is closed to the public this video
provides a look at some of the major
problems besetting this 72 year old
facility as the media has reported the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency has
mandated Toledo fix the plant and the
distribution system or face severe
consequences including additional costs
plant administrator Andy McClure
highlights some of the most critical
problems facing the plant the source of
water for the city of Toledo is Lake
Erie and the process begins
approximately 12 miles east of the city
an intake for about three miles off
shore the process begins at the end
intake grib first chemical addition is
there there's a three mile long nine
foot diameter tunnel underneath the lake
bed that flows into the low service
pumping station here another chemical is
added and pumps at the low service
pumping station pump the water to the
water treatment plant at Collins Park
more chemicals are added at the
treatment plant ultimately the water is
filtered it flows through the filters
into an underground clear well storage
tank it's pumped from that clear wall
storage tank out into the distribution
system for the city of Toledo this whole
system has been in continuous operation
since 1941
we're in one of the population basins at
the columns mark water treatment plant
this is an early stage in the process
where Lake Erie water is treated to
become mobile water flocculation process
starts separate what makes Lake Erie
brown get it out to make a drink it
probably that is the roof is aging and
deteriorating honks the roof or falling
down into the treatment process and
potentially falling on employees it's a
short-term fix we've installed netting
to keep material fallin into the end of
the process and infect employees the
long-term fix would be to replace the
entire roof structure this valve is part
of the backwash process at the water
treatment plant it's been in continuous
service since 1941 it's well maintained
but it's at the end of its useful life
the size of the valve and the age of the
valve it's really not something that we
can get parts for and make repairs has
to be replaced in this this condition is
typical of many valves throughout the
plan similar age we're in a pipe gallery
in the basement of the plant on the
other side of this wall for me is water
going to the treatment process this
construction joined the concrete the
condition of it is typical construction
joints throughout the facility water is
leak through it over time its water
leaks through the joint can tend to get
bigger and bigger and these need to be
repaired before it becomes a structural
issue we're in the hi service pump
station control room it's in this room
that the pumps are operated to control
the pressure in the distribution system
the control wiring for these pumps is a
blend of wiring installed originally in
1941 all the way up through improvements
in the 90s and even 2010 the whole
system does need overhaul a lot of the
wiring is at the end of its useful life
as you can see by the condition of some
of these wires and the age of the
insulation on them we're in the high
service pumping station switch care area
this were power from the electric
utility comes into the plan it's
distributed where needed throughout the
facility was all constructed in 1941 and
it's been in continuous service since
then the equipment can still be
maintained and calibrated but it is
obsolete and needs modernized
for instance this relay here was
manufactured in 1936 this is a low
service pumping station where water is
pumped from the leg to the water
treatment plant here we have a 70 year
old valve in a continuous service since
1941 the valve fittings and piping are
all original equipment from the 1940s
and our need of work we're in the north
well the low service pumping station
behind me is low service pump number one
it's currently in service pumping water
from the lake to the water treatment
plant both service pump number one is
one of our recent improvements out here
the variable speed drive for that pump
was added the late 80s and early 90s the
rest of the pumps are essentially as it
were in 1941 except for routine
maintenance
you
I'm very concerned we want to make sure
that I have young ones at home and I
also have other young family members and
I want to make sure that they're getting
proper drinking water yes I am I'm very
concerned about the water service every
day you're seeing mains being broken all
the time I'm very concerned about that
because I think our sewer lines are very
old and I'm very concerned
oh I'm definitely willing to willing to
pay a higher rate I feel that in order
to fix it it needs to be paid for we use
it so we're the ones who are supposed to
be paying for it just like the streets
that we drive on we want them to be
paved we have to pay for that as well we
have to pay to live that's the way of
the world
if that means ensuring healthy water for
my employees and my family yeah sure
unfortunately they have to increase the
water rates it's just an unfortunate
thing everything has to go up and I
understand that I mean I'm a citizen I
don't want to pay it but I'm gonna have
to and that's okay I don't mind paying
it I'd rather have clean water
increase those rates we're willing to
pay for it if we're willing to use the
water we'll have to pay for it it's
important for the future not now but
it's important for more than for the
future if we don't have water we don't
have a city period consider doing what
needs to be done and take care of the
water situation and we can't wait until
everything breaks down then we say oh we
got to go fix them it's too late in na
because too many too much time is going
to go by before we realize that we're
going to be out of time and we're almost
at that point now
you